Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lange.
Science fiction writer George R.R. Martin recently had his third novel, Fever Dream, published in hardcover by Poseidon Press.
Fever Dream is a science-fictional, historical horror novel which combines the vampire legend and Mississippi riverboats in the antebellum south.
We asked Martin why he chose to write about a combination of vampires and riverboats.
The vampires came first as I was putting the book together.
I had read a fair amount about vampires.
I had read other people's vampire novels before, Dracula, as well as the other books I had done recently.
And I had wanted to do my own version of that legend for some time because I had a few ideas about it.
But I didn't want it to be just another Dracula book, just another rehash of the same old legends.
Because we've seen vampire books after vampire books are essentially just the same things spun over and over again.
I think that's what tires them.
And at the same time I was going through all these thoughts about vampires was the period that I was living in Dubuque, Iowa.
I taught college there for three years.
And Dubuque, of course, is an old river town.
It was once a big steamboat manufacturing center and it's still very much imbued with the old history of the great era of steam on the Mississippi.
So it was during that period while I was in Dubuque that I got interested in the steamboat.
I read a fair amount about them.
And once I did, the two things just seemed to come together in my mind.
There's a certain romanticism, I think, a dark romanticism that clings to both the old steamboats and vampires.
They're both very attractive in a certain sense.
The elegant vampire and the stately, intricate, gorgeous steamboat.
But they also have dark sides too, of course.
In Fever Dream, the protagonist, Captain Abner Marsh, owner of a failing steamboat company, the Fever River Packet Line,
realizes his lifelong dream of captaining a fast, luxurious steamboat when it becomes partners with the mysterious Joshua York.
All Marsh has to do to maintain the partnership and keep the fancy steamboat
as sail up and down the river and avoid questioning York's somewhat odd habits.
But York begins bringing aboard a strange retina of acquaintances, all of whom have nocturnal habits.
And of course Marsh has difficulty staying his curiosity.
As Marsh learns about York and his friends, he discovers they are vampires.
But Martin presents vampires in a manner never seen in fantasy.
He explains them in rational terms.
This meant including some of the legendary characteristics of vampires but leaving others out.
I wanted to have rationalized vampires.
I wanted to have vampires that I felt could actually exist, that were not based on, you know, vague supernatural legends and down over the years.
So I had to look at each of the particular beliefs associated with vampires.
Now see, is there any way that I could justify this in a rational manner?
Now obviously something about vampires not coming out during day, which the vampires in my book Fever Dream do have that characteristic.
Well, that's very easily explainable.
It's just they're nocturnal creatures.
Their skin is extremely sensitive to ultraviolet, so they burn very badly if they're exposed to daylight.
So they avoid it.
You can justify that easily.
But you look at something they're not reflected in mirrors.
I mean, there's no way to justify not being reflected in mirrors scientifically.
You have to rewrite essentially all the laws governing light and reflection and refraction and so on.
That's strictly a supernatural motif, so I had to get rid of that.
Obviously considering that the book is about vampires on Mississippi River steamboats,
I had to get rid of the one that said they can't cross running water as well.
So I said, say I'll up and down the steamboat all through the book.
More on George Martin's Fever Dream on our next show.
Music
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Music
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
Music
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And Bill Vernon.
Music
As we discussed in our last show, the book combines elements of the vampire legend
and a Mark Twain-like presentation of Mississippi Riverboat lore.
Music
The humans, by the way, are deprecatingly referred to by some of the vampires as cattle.
This choice is another element which separates Martin's vampires from those of traditional fantasy.
Music
This is about vampires on Mississippi River Steamboats, but in a deeper sense, it's about moral choices.
And one of the things that Joshua York, the vampire, says to Abner, Abner Marsh, the protagonist,
and that Abner later says back to him is, you make your choices. We all make our choices.
If you take the traditional vampire thing, the traditional vampire beliefs, the traditional vision of the vampire,
you don't have choice. The vampire is an avatar of undying, ancient, and absolutely black evil.
Well, okay, fine. That makes for good entertainment, but as it interacts with the real world, kind of a hollow construct.
The real world is made up of graves. I mean, real people are made up of graves.
We don't have absolute good, and we don't have absolute evils.
The good and evil that we have resides in each of us, and it is a matter of moral choice.
Damon Julian is a charismatic elder vampire who rejects the potion.
He did make a choice he owns ago, but he also makes the choice in terms of the book at the banquet
when he essentially rejects what Joshua has to offer.
And states his opposition to Joshua with saying, you know, we are born. This is what we are born to be.
Masters over humanity, people who take the lives of those inferior to us.
And this is our nature. So he is making a choice there. He's rejecting Joshua's potion.
He's rejecting the freedom from the Red Thirst that Joshua offers, and he's accepting what he thinks is of his superior nature.
Martin told us that he found a close parallel between Julian's view of the human race and slavery as it existed in the south at the time of the book, 1857.
Of course, there's also certain, you know, resonances there with the whole slavery thing, which I tried to put through all the way through the book.
It takes place in the antebellum south, late antebellum south, and slavery, of course, is very hot then.
And the whole master-slave thing that existed between blacks and whites in the south then has a kind of a fantasy reflection
and a relationship between vampires and human beings.
This parallel even strikes Abner Marsh as the story progresses.
Abner Marsh is never an evil man. I think by nature he is a good man.
But he is a man at the beginning of the book who is essentially just living his own life.
And the great moral issues of his time like slavery are, you know, things he kind of hashes out over the dinner table,
but never has any great personal involvement in it.
But as a result of the whole experience with the steamer, fever dream, and the things that happen to him,
I think that Abner Marsh changes and becomes, in essence, made as much more aware of and necessitates to make moral choices.
More on George Martin's Fever Dream on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
And as always, thanks for watching!
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us!
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon.
And Daryl Lane.
Science Fiction author George R.R. Martin's latest novel is Fever Dream, a science fictional historical horror story about vampires and Mississippi riverboats.
Here Martin explains the title of the book.
The title of the book is taken from the name of the steamboat in the book, the fever dream is named the steamboat.
And the reason Avner Marsh names the steamboat Fever Dream is because it is the boat he has always dreamed of having, the grand, luxurious, fast steamer.
And because he is the president, his company is called Fever River Package Company, with that odd spelling he already inverted.
Okay, that explains the origin of Fever Dream, but where did the oddly spelled Fever originate?
It has to do with Captain Marsh's birthplace.
He was born in Galena, Illinois.
And the river Galena is located on a small tributary that comes off the Mississippi, which originally was named Fever River, F-E-V-R-E River, in the early 1800s.
And Marsh, of course, was born during that period and grew up calling it, in point of fact that, and this is all historically true,
the name of that river was changed to Galena River fairly early on because the town got respectable and they didn't want people thinking they were all sick there.
So they thought it would be better to call it the Galena River.
But Galena was a very important steamboat town and the fever in its early days, today it's nothing but a creek that's completely silted up and I've visited it and you couldn't get a robot to pop it, let alone a major steamer.
But in the early 1800s, Galena was a major steamboat port and the fever or the Galena River as it later became was a very bustling little tributary indeed.
We asked Martin if there were actual steamboats as fast and as luxurious as the fever dream.
The dimensions of the fever dream and the capacity of her engines and so forth are modeled very closely on the eclipse.
In terms of the book, the eclipse is the queen of the river, the fastest, largest and most luxurious boat and it's the one Abner Marsh aspires to displace as fastest steamer on the river and that's why he built the fever dream.
The eclipse was a real historical boat of its era, the 1850s, and was considered the fastest boat of that era.
It did indeed win a very famous steamboat race against the Shotwell and some people including Mark Twain put forward evidence that the fever dream was in fact the fastest steamer ever on the river.
And there were later steamers in the 1870s and the 1880s that while they were not perhaps as fast as the fever dream in the book or the eclipse in real life were even more luxurious like the J.M. White, a very fast and incredibly luxurious steamer of the 1870s, 1880s.
One of the interesting facts that strikes the readers that river boats were extremely short lived.
That was one of the interesting things that turned up when I was researching it that kind of startled me too. I mean they're such formidable looking structures. You'd think they'd be around for ages but in fact they had a shorter lifespan than the modern car.
Martin had to do considerable research on steamboats to ensure the accuracy of the historical details in fever dream.
More with George Martin on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is George Martin, the director of the film, and the director of the film, The Science Fiction Radio Show.
One of the most popular genres in mass market literature is the horror genre.
We asked science fiction author George R. R. Martin, author of the recently published horror novel Fever Dream, why he thinks the horror genre is currently so successful.
But then we put down the book and we know that what we're afraid of, vampires, werewolves, haunted hotels, whatever, is not real.
And people don't mind dealing with that and kind of getting a little catharsis out of that, but they don't want to deal with real, the real terrifying things, violence in the streets and crime and crazed psychos out there.
And the threat of nuclear holocaust and all of the other more real fears that also hang over it. So I think that may be part of it.
There are many creatures that embody horror in the literature, ghosts, monsters, ghouls, werewolves, witches, but probably the most enduring image of horror is the vampire, the nocturnal stalker who drinks the blood of its unwary victims.
The vampire legend spans many cultures. Here Martin tells us about the vampire legend and the reasons why the legend may be so popular even now.
Vampires are an almost universal legend, which is one thing that turned out when I was researching Fever Dream. The vampires we're familiar with, of course, Dracula and his kin, so to speak, and all the books that are derived from that tradition are essentially retreads of Eastern European, Romanian, Hungarian, largely vampire legends.
But if you look around the world, you'll find vampire legends everywhere. In China, in Africa, in the South Seas, there are variants of the vampire legend. The details differ, but the basic vision of a nocturnal predator that preys on human beings is present in all of these.
And so that would lead you to wonder why do they have this universal appeal. The easy answer is to why they're appealing in our culture today, in modern American mass society, I think, is the sexual nature of the vampire, the sexual symbolism embodied in Dracula and in the way it's been treated by Hollywood.
The sense that kind of the symbolism of vampire as a seductor is, um, appeals to something within us and gives legend a lot more resonances than, say, the werewolf legend or zombies or some of the other things that have never really achieved the popularity of the vampire legend.
But then you could say, well, that's true for us, but it doesn't explain why the legend is so universal around the world. And indeed, it doesn't, and I don't have an answer for that.
Martin tells us here how he incorporated this universal, transcultural concept of the vampire and fever dream.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.